we've got one more talk for you today uh
coming up next we have rodel warner
who's a wonderful artist um and a friend
of mine
he's worked his recent series terraria
has been absolutely blowing up the nft
space on hika nuke
rodel is a trinidadian artist working
primarily in new media and photography
his works have been exhibited at the
whitney museum
museum of american art in 2016 as part
of the dreamlands exhibition um in lorna
mills's ways of something uh series
and at the national gallery of jamaica
in the 2016 exhibition digital as well
as the 10th berlin biennale um
in 2018. rudel is a recipient of the
2011 commonwealth connections
international arts residency and the
2014 summer residency at nls kingston
and he was commissioned in 2017 to
create the davidoff art edition a series
of five artworks printed onto a limited
edition of 5 000 boxes of luxury cigars
and presented and sold at art basel in
hong kong miami and basel
rhodell lives and works between port of
spain and trinidad kingston in jamaica
and austin texas in the u.s
i'll turn it over to him and you'll
learn a little bit more
all right uh hi great area festival
my name is rodell rodell warner
and um
i'm an office that makes
recently uh
many 3d models of plants
and i use those in my work
um
[Music]
i animate them and i
um
try and find ways to use those models
that i enjoy i make prints and things
like that but
i also just like to kind of play with
them online
um so for gray area festival
this year
i'm one of the participating artists and
what i'm doing is installing some of
these models of mine
um in one of the virtual spaces one of
the exhibition rooms
um sharing a room with oria harvey who's
with her love
and um so i just want to talk about
some things that i've been thinking
about in relation to that installation
um
i have a few points that i want to kind
of hit um
and i'm just gonna talk about these
things
um
so just to give you a sense of where
we're going with this
i'm gonna talk about
[Music]
maybe i don't need to do that i'll just
i'll just tell you okay so
um
so i make these models
and um
and i'm thinking about uh
encounters with nature in virtual space
so
um i actually started
started making when i started making
exhibitions there were photography
exhibitions i was very much into
photography and still i photograph lots
of plants
um
because of that i have this like huge
reservoir of
images of plants that i use
when i make models but also just the
images themselves um before i was making
3d models i made lots of other types of
digital work using
images of plants sometimes taking images
of plants and um extruding them you know
blowing them up into 3d forms
um sometimes
making patterns out of them
um
just using images of plants basically as
like a
kind of source material and exploring
what i could do with that
um
and so i had this whole history i feel
like my my kind of
history
of making art is kind of very much
um
punctuated by
just encounters with
plants and images of plants specifically
in virtual space
and um
so yeah so i'm thinking a lot about
encounters with
nature in virtual space i should also
mention i'm from
trinidad and tobago
um
uh caribbean islands twin island state
trinidad actually they say broke off of
south america the closest point between
trinidad and venezuela is actually seven
miles you can just get a little dingy
and zip across
and you can actually see some of the
mountains
um in venezuela from
the capital of trinidad port puerto
spain on a clear day
um
and
because i'm from this island that has
just incredible biodiversity
um
and i'm from the north of the island
where there's a
mountain range in northern range
um i kind of grew up
very close in very close proximity to
forests
the high school that i went to is called
trinity college
and it is
built like right on the edge of this
massive forest
um like you go to school in the morning
and
there's a three stories up there's a
transparent frog on the outside wall of
the of the school is school it's built
in like the 40s or something just
doesn't have any doors just has these
arches to allow wind to pass through it
means like lots of animals come in all
the time
um
so all these incredible insects and
patterns that you would see on their
bodies and
um
you know lots of school activities
involved
going into the forest
um
and also where i live
very much
where i grew up is very much a sort of
um
settlement that was
carved into
a a hillside and a valley that's very
rich forest
so
growing up
and
just
being in trinidad to me
often involved
just being in close proximity to nature
and when i started doing photography
which
i kind of got into by accident i i was
really into graphic design but i got
tired of paying for stock photos so i
bought a camera so i could take my own
pictures fell in love with photography
and
you know ended up just taking so many
pictures of plants
um
so often my installations
and things that i would present would
just blow these images up extrude them
um colorize them uh make patterns out of
them
and i'm really an artist who works with
images of plants
even though i didn't really think about
it or understand that until very
recently
so one of the things that i think about
a lot is how individual space
in blender when i'm modeling a plant or
when i'm making a pattern in photoshop
or something
i get to experience the
plant
in a way that i wasn't able to
experience it in real life um often in
nature like when you're outside there's
so much to consider
um i don't necessarily feel particularly
safe
in the forest
which is bringing me to one of the
points that i wanted to talk about and
it's this artwork by banksy
and it's called crimewatch uk
has ruined the countryside for all of us
and it's this
like canvas this like oil painting
of a little house or something
um but it's really a forested area it's
really in like in nature
um
and what banksy didn't make that
painting kind of bought it at a flea
market or something
and
um what he did paint into it was these
like blue and white police
um it's like caution tape like police
like do not cross lines is police
barrier
um
and
it kind of creates this conversation
about the way that
uh forested areas or like you know just
like
being
in the woods or something
in
popular media
is often portrayed as unsafe like you
know if you stray away from a
civilization if you stray away from
sort of human
dwellings
species that people have built
if you go far enough away from that you
get in some kind of trouble
maybe even a type of trouble where like
some random person kills you
um there's so many like detective
stories and so his thing is crime watch
uk
um has ruined the countryside for all of
us so just like telling of so many
stories of bad things happening in
nature
um creates this kind of
overwhelming
um overarching
theme for people in our society
regarding nature that is unsafe
and i certainly feel that um and in
trinidad
there's its own trend that media has its
own sort of version of that
where there was so many
um reports or stories of
kidnappings and
terrible things
uh
killings and things that happen and if
in as far as the things that happen in
the bush
that really make
even if it's not rational even if you
don't really ever experience it yourself
even if the stories are overblown
sensationalized
and not representative of the general
experience
the feeling of
uh being unsafe is created
and associated with
being in the forest
so
um
one of the things i think about is how
much different it is to experience
nature and visual space because there's
no threat of being killed or whatever
um being attacked by an animal or
um
i don't know uh
face eating fungus or whatever like the
thing about nature is that it's
so
um unfamiliar
that the unfamiliarity of it makes it
scary you know like oh which brings me
to another point well should i go there
now
okay so
i'm saying that
i collect lots of images i make lots of
models i put those models and images in
visual space the experience of
interacting with these models
and images patterns and so on in virtual
space is safe whereas the feeling of
interacting with actual plants in nature
is
a little feels a little unsafe a little
dangerous
um
so one yeah one thing i want to tell you
about is when i did actually one time
go to
this
rural area of trinidad to the north
east it's called toko it's near the sea
but there's also this like it's just
this huge forested area it's very
sparsely
populated there's not many people there
um and i have a friend who is an
architect and built a little house for
his parents there
and
um allows artists to go and spend time
there just as a way to kind of connect
with nature and spend time in
toku and so one time i was there
and i said decided to take a walk just
to just not go to the beaches where
there are people hanging out but to go
into the forest along a path that had
passed some days before and i've had
good experiences at this time i was just
recording images video of
plants and animals pictures video of um
flowers and leaves and insects i can't
come across a tarantula
um got this fantastic video of a praying
mantis i flew into the camera
i used all that stuff um to make little
loops and gifts that i created a sort of
immersive
experience uh
for an event
so i was i had this event in mind and i
was going on this walk to kind of
collect material to make some images to
make some
some some gifts
and
i go along this path
and at one point i passed like uh
a set of um vultures that have kind of
like descended on this tree and they're
weighing down all the branches of the
trees there's so many of them in there
and there's like something dead nearby
and there's just this stench of death in
the air and at the same time
the like this
you know it was sunny just a moment ago
all of a sudden it's like the clouds
roll over and
cover the sun and so no sudden smells
like death and it's dark and cloudy
and i'm on this path and i'm alone i
suddenly kind of realized that i've gone
far enough away where i don't think
there's anybody nearby
and down the path comes
racing at top speed a pack of like 12 to
15 dogs and they're coming directly at
me because they're also using the same
path i'm using but they come in the
opposite direction
and i am just scared shitless and i
don't know what to do i just kind of
freeze and wait and they just run right
past
but i get the feeling i know that uh i'm
at the mercy of nature at this point i'm
you know there's no house for me to hide
and there's no weapon for me to use
um
it's a situation where i'm just one of
the things in nature and i'm not the
most well equipped i'm actually quite
vulnerable and at this pack of dogs
however they came to be um
was even interested in me in any way
that i didn't like i wouldn't have much
i mean i could try but i would be
outnumbered and
that really created for me the sense
that um
well that i'm unsafe but also of like
how
the experience of nature the experience
of the world in society really has a lot
to do with being
protected by
human built spaces
um you know our cities and places are
places where we have like driven all the
other animals out
and build whatever barriers we need to
build and have like you know
just decimated populations and done what
we need to do so that we don't run into
wild packs of animals and walk around
without worrying about it
um there are also places where we don't
run into like plants and stuff because
you know just we just clear space
the only plants that we really have
around other ones that we
feel like we need to keep but when you
go into
sort of unmitigated space just natural
spaces
you find all kinds of unfamiliar things
all kinds of things that people don't
know what they can be used for and don't
know the uses of and don't know the
value of out you know just stuff as bush
plants
um
on that same path on the way back out
i ran into some
men
who paused as they saw me
and i paused as i saw them i had my
camera in my hand pretty large slr i'm
not sure what they thought it was
they had cutlasses
i realized that i was on some kind of
farmland i i didn't know this at the
time but there were some like marijuana
fields
past where i had gone
and so it's
you know the land is kind of um
there are some
complications to being there
um eventually we i was brave enough to
approach the men
they were brave enough to approach me
we realized that we were not threats to
each other
and we had some kind of friendly
exchange let me carry on
but again this
you know looming fear
being and not just for me for them to
being in sort of
on
unmitigated
un
managed
natural space
um
creating all kinds of complications
so
um
when i have a 3d model of so when i was
there i made lots of videos and um
recorded images of plants in such a way
that i could model them you know i took
a picture from the front i take a
picture from the side this gives me like
reference images that i can create
um i can create 3d models for once i
have a front image and a side image i
can create a 3d model if i have a top
dimension like a 45 degree angle
i can make an even better i can do it
even more easily
do i make my 3d models is not by
scanning but by drawing so they're
really drawings but i'm drawing in 3d
space um
lots of uh people are now drawing in 3d
space in like um in just literally
drawing in visual space using like maybe
um
like an oculus
vr headset and vr tools
but i'm
still drawing with
a mouse or trackpad
in blender in just like 3d editing
software
um
and so
i recorded lots of images that i could
use at that point
um on that trip um
i forget what i was actually going to
see
relating to that
maybe i should just move on to my next
point
which is um
which is about
sort of depictions of nature in ritual
spaces and
one of the things i thought about
um that really struck me
uh that stuck with me is a donkey kong
[Music]
what was that for playstation i don't
remember exactly but
this game don't become country
you play this character or one of two
characters that moves through this sort
of platform
it's kind of platformer
movies like platforms levels
avoiding
obstacles
attacking
and defending against enemies
and you know it can be really stressful
and you're in the lost world and all of
a sudden you're dealing with zingers and
all these other enemies coming at you
all at once and on top of this you have
to deal with these barrels that
don't want to work right half of the
time at some points the game at the end
of the game these obstacles come at you
pretty fast these enemies come at you
pretty aggressively
and it's all about your sort of this
dexterity and
attention and reaction time and stuff
like that
um
there are there are particular levels in
dockercon um where you're no longer
playing in the jungle as you do in the
rest of the game but you're not playing
like underwater
and in these underwater levels
on these underwater levels the music
changes
so it's no longer like drums
um sort of congo drums and stuff as you
would hear in the
more like terrestrial
levels and then the water levels you
hear more like synthesizers and sort of
like
softer more gentle
sounds almost like lullaby type sounds
watery sounds
and because you're moving in water
everything's a little more slow
and
you get a chance to observe
images of plants more you get a chance
to observe all the like sea life marine
life and it's kind of a
it's kind of a special thing because the
rest of the game you know you're just
going through and you're not really like
you don't really have you're not moving
slowly enough to observe anything you
can just trying to get through the level
but when it comes to water levels even
though there are enemies and stuff it's
way more chill
and you just get to look at stuff more
and the stuff you get to look at is like
you know these depictions of natural
natural elements of the world that's
built in the game
as i was thinking about that about how
um
how i felt
when i when i when i didn't have to you
know
work so hard anymore to avoid danger
in the spiritual space where i could
um
sort of spend more time enjoying the
environment itself
um
you know all of this does connect to
what i'm building
for gray area festival
i'm placing my models in
space in ways that i hope people will
enjoy discovering
and
taking time to
observe once they find them
um
[Music]
and it's a space that's not dangerous in
any way
it's just playful
it's just um
it's just for enjoying
um one other thing that one other point
that i kind of written down that i want
to talk about was
um
my encounters with nature in jamaica so
in jamaica um
where i've spent some time live for a
little while in jamaica
um
there are way more mountains and the
forests are way more dense
and
because there are mountains you go up
really high and at
the higher altitudes
there are just things that don't grow
lower down
so there's all kinds of
ecosystems that are foreign to me
i remember one time
we were
visiting
going to a
going to a very high point and driving
up a very steep hill
and the higher up the hill we went the
more ridiculous looking the plants got
so at first it was just like you know
there's lots of feelings all over
jamaica so if this was just like lots of
foods lots of vines
fruit trees things like that
but the higher up you go
um so to see like
like things that look like maybe like
cane like keen
stocks but so tall you don't even know
how they
how it makes sense that it could stand
upright
and would leave so long that they
shouldn't be
also standing upright
and then things that like produce
flowers that
are so bountiful and plentiful that they
kind of like
uh
bunch up on each other or
i took pictures but i can't really
describe the things i'm going to see if
i find any of these pictures that i've
that i've taken and so i can share this
but
the thing i
the thing that blew my mind
um seeing like just the ridiculous
diversity
being somebody who
models plants
and has also like
thought about
fictionalizing plants
but wasn't feeling like i had the
authority to do that seeing these plans
that just looked totally ridiculous made
me realize that like nature just tries
things
and
ends up with things that look
so ridiculous so playful
so unreal
that there's nothing i could make up
or imagine i don't think
that
that would appear to be too ridiculous
but it couldn't actually be something
that exists in nature because
there is so much
like that nature produces that just it
just looks unreal it just looks so
ridiculous
so um
you know some of those things were too
difficult for me to model the way that
they're up there to draw you know i've
been drawing in 3d space since maybe
um i'm really good at it but i'm not at
the absolute best there are you know
many people who are just better and so
there are things that are still
challenging for me that i i
it's said i can't do it but the amount
of time i would have to spend doing that
and i probably would choose not to
um attempt certain things
often you know i'm making something for
a show or for a project and this
time constraints
i wouldn't just want to spend you know a
year modeling something
but um
you know there exists these things that
might as well be fictional
that are real things real
i almost certainly works a lot in nature
um well that's another thing you know in
a way nature's kind of this like
generative artwork
um
and when i look at it that way
and i really
i just really enjoy doing that
anyway it's probably about time for me
to wrap up
um
i really hope you enjoy what i'm making
and let's talk i mean what happens next
is that there's a q a session and
there's also some time that we can just
like chat with each other
after that after the q a
and um
yeah i just
i would just enjoy i think talking about
um different people's sort of encounters
with um nature and ritual space and
maybe helps compare to encounters
um with nature in
non-virtual space
and um
yeah i just really hope you like what i
made
so
um yeah
let's talk more about this thanks for
being here my name is rodell wanna
um
talk to you soon we're back with rodol
warner um master of virtual plants and
creator of digital gardens um how's it
going rhodell
it's really good thanks for having me
yeah absolutely um
you know i i can't believe you blew up
my spot a little bit with some of my my
virtual landscape recordings in the talk
but i appreciate you pointing them out i
mean as you know i am uh obsessed with
virtual worlds and virtual landscapes
and particularly virtual nature and kind
of the feeling that that it gives you um
and i love the way that you're thinking
about the relationship between virtual
virtual environments and natural
experiences and and and offline uh
natural experiences and i'm wondering
you know in in this in your practice of
create of of working with these plants
and rendering them kind of what
what sort of happens in that space
between the physical and the digital
like as you're creating these
these virtual objects and artifacts um
you know what
like you know what kind of you know
magic is going on is that as that living
thing is converted into something that
is
zeros and ones
yeah well first of all i usually really
um just love the thing that i'm modeling
and kind of in awe of it as its own like
sculptural
you know
um work
um and i'm also often aware that i can't
like get as much detail i can't copy it
exactly so um
i'm often trying to like just take parts
of things that i that i really love or
um
[Music]
maybe trying to
make a version of it that i feel is like
um flattering but then but then recently
i've been kind of like interested in um
taking liberties
um and sometimes uh
sometimes i find my imagination kind of
limited um compared to things that i
find in nature
um
i feel like it's just some kind of a
dance between like
while knowing that i can't actually copy
this thing exactly as it exists i'm
working with the limitations that i have
because i am making them by hand to just
kind of make something that feels
um
lovely or delicate or precious in some
way
so i'm kind of just like sampling the
plant
i think you touched on something that i
thought it was
interesting to reflect upon well several
things of course but one that caught my
attention in particular where you were
saying at some point that you did not
feel that you
uh you know where um
that you should have the agency of
creating these new
um plants or new flowers or news
let's say nature in general and i and i
thought that it was very very powerful
because
then you you started talking about um
how
it was very hard to create something
that wasn't already there by nature
right because there's plenty of things
that are out there and um
yeah i don't know i'm i mean when you
came on to that uh reflection yourself
how how did you
yeah how did you arrive into that
because
i think that's something in a way at
least within the digital world we talk a
lot about fractals right and we talk a
lot about like these in a way algorithms
of nature that replicate themselves to
create these
incredibly
beautiful
beings living beings right that are
super complex
and i don't know if that in a way ties
up as well with your work
yeah something between that
yeah yeah totally like um so i i
remember um seeing like like like first
of all there are lots of palm trees in
the caribbean
there's one particular type of palm tree
that's so thin
it's i don't know it feels like it might
just be like the entire tree might just
be like that thick
and it goes up into the air like a
hundred feet into the air and like it
just looks like an and then and then the
palms at the top and they're always
swinging in the breeze and they bend a
lot
and
you know it doesn't look like it should
be possible for that to exist it doesn't
look like something should be
no i don't i can't imagine how you would
anchor it and even if i imagine a really
elaborate anchoring system i still can't
wrap my head around and it exists i mean
that's how it works right it has some
kind of really secure
um architecture under the ground that
that manages to like be stable enough to
keep this 100 foot
piece of wood like thing in the air
but even knowing that that's possible if
i look at it and it doesn't seem like it
should work it doesn't look like it
makes sense and and so like if i'm if
i'm to draw something or make something
i want to make something i feel like i
want to make something that that looks
like it should make sense
but then in actual nature there are
things all the time you encounter things
that don't look like they make sense but
they do make sense and so like i have so
much respect for that
um
those those like like apparently
clashing
um
realities that things things that look
impossible
are so soberingly possible
that i don't that that it makes me it
makes me feel like i feel a bit like
some reservation to make something
that's just purely ridiculous because
i'm like you know there's things out
there that look purely ridiculous but
they they actually work
and so um i have so much respect for
these actual actually like
well-functioning ridiculous living
sculptures that i'm like can i even
like get involved in this conversation
but um
i can that's the thing because um
even if mine doesn't work
or live or is you know not as complex of
beautiful as a natural thing
um
it's just a representation and
you know there are things that that look
really really really wild and i can make
stuff that looks really really well it
doesn't have to um
yeah it's just you know i just have so
much respect for the thing that i just
um i just have a hard time um
negotiating what i feel i should do
um there's a second part of what you
were saying too um when you when you
talked about um just the fact that
they're living just in fact they
i mean um
so human beings we're gonna make stuff
that you know we're making stuff that's
increasingly complex
and we make stuff that's like you know
like that that's kind of like automated
automatic things like you know machines
that
exist with no wires like when you see
those like crazy videos of those boston
dynamics um
robots like this spot dog robot other
ones the atlas one the one that looks
like a human and it's doing backflips
and all this stuff like we're gonna get
so much better at making
um
making you know organisms
that it seems like the trajectory that
we're on
winds up ends up
in the same place that nature is in
except nature is like way ahead
of us
um so i mean modeling plants and stuff
you just feel like you're part of that
um
you know making animated versions of
natural things just feel like you're
positive that um but then we just have
like incredible respect for
nature itself and and what what feels
like the recognition that we're trying
to do the same thing which is not that
far yet
and i think in a way is
sort of like a process of speculative
communication
because we cannot
we don't necessarily understand all of
the subjectivities that are outside of
the human way of perceiving right we can
only imagine
but
i think that in a way building or
thinking about
these systems of
yeah of life of creation and
as absurd that they might feel sometimes
like i remember when my my parents used
to live in brazil and there were some
crazy
crazy insects out there and i was like
oh my god like i've never seen
anything like this before and i
sometimes i couldn't even
describe what i was seeing and
by trying to describe that to someone
else
not necessarily recreating that only
through you know words but
i thought that there was a kind of
i know like a speculative communication
laying i know like
across all of that like trying to
understand something that
at first doesn't make sense to me of
course but then trying to
verbalize that and eventually well if i
don't know if i had to draw that then
you know to create an image for it and
to start sharing from that process of
acknowledging this being
i know there's something that i feel can
be very
strong not only in understanding what is
around us in terms of you know this all
of these um systems of non-human
intelligences that are
coexisting with us and that sometimes we
just cannot necessarily perceive but not
because they are not there or they are
not close but because we just do not
have the proper tools for that the
technologies for that acknowledging
technology as you know part of
thinking about language as a technology
or you know the developing our own
senses as a technology but i know i
think it it comes
at a very particular point of time as
well you know
trying to reconnect with all of that and
and then also understanding the whole
current context of course um
i think it is very powerful
yeah
oh go ahead rydel sorry no just just i
just uh i just love uh thinking about
this stuff and um hearing you say these
things um
one thing you made me think about i i
don't even know i feel like off topic
here like like there's other things
we're talking about but um
i you know you talk to you mention those
insects and like the patterns on their
bodies and stuff like it's too weak and
maybe just like the way that their
bodies are formed and things like that
and and also sort of like speculative
communication like sometimes
sometimes oh so sometimes i
wonder
if in the
intention to replicate or mimic ain't
you
um we don't learn things and so
in like
so
just all of these patterns images
examples as a form of communication
you know you
you learn
how to make these things how to
make things like these things by trying
your hand at um describing them
um you might be trying to describe them
um in 3d form in a program or you might
be
um
you know um vanell
uh who spoke earlier was talking about
um carnival costumes and
there are so many carnival costumes
because i'm from trinidad too from the
same place in carnival this is like it's
like life-giving force in the whole and
you just mentioned brazil so you know
i'm talking about like
like carnival
so there are so many kind of old costume
designers and makers in trinidad um
like that years ago who to take
inspiration from nature
and would make like just gigantic
um
mimics of uh
of of animals of insects and things
um and so i'm thinking of like uh just a
bunch of different practices
um over a
large period of time
analog practices digital practices that
um take inspiration from nature and
and as you mentioned this like
speculative communication is like um
this like learning that comes out of
um trying to describe or paying
attention to nature um
yeah you just have me thinking about
like you know the fact that we like we
learn
so many interesting things um
i mean i i'm thinking again about these
like those boss and dynamics robots like
i can't think of how much um
information knowledge that's
you know from humans
observing you trying to mimic nature
that goes into like spot to dog or like
the atlas machine you know
i was you know in thinking about like
you know you were talking about how the
natural world
um
you know is kind of in the future um and
when you said that i immediately thought
of you know i'm based here in the bay
area i grew up at the foothills of the
santa cruz mountains and um you know
this work this new area is native to you
know the redwood tree and redwood trees
grow in these really elaborate systems
where you see a whole group of trees
that are really just one organism and
they have these really complicated ways
of communicating with each other that
that nobody really understands i mean
there's so many stories in california
about how um the trees if it gets too
dry send out these signals that that
call moisture in the air and you know
based on the kinds of chemicals they're
releasing there's all these ideas about
how the redwoods like call thunderstorms
and they call rain when they need when
they need things and there's all these
like you know complicated speculated
you know modes by which these organisms
are able to communicate with each other
are able to shape the world around them
um and maintain the natural balance uh
that's that's necessary um and i don't
know i i feel that in some way in in
these works and particularly
in the the the terrarium pieces like
these are kind of so these are kind of
aligned with that series these plants
cased in these kind of clear
shiny resin
or crystalline structures
um yeah i was wondering if you could
talk a little bit about you know the
terrarium series and
some of the you know the mythologies or
ideas that you have embedded in in these
in these artifacts
um you know the first one that i made
um
i had so i had a bunch of i didn't i
didn't really intend to make a vessel to
put these models of plants in but i had
a bunch of different plants that i
modeled from jamaica i had um some
phones i had some palms
and i had um there's just this tree that
has these um these leaves that when they
cool up they make like this this really
weird cheap uh holy water tree and that
that tree has this like kind of vine
like
structure that i had models and i had
these models and i i i really liked
looking at them together and i just made
uh a sort of crystalline shape i kind of
like a little
box and i put them in there and then i
applied a subsurface uh
modifier to that shape and it made it
kind of rounded
and it's okay i mean it's kind of like
egg like shape kind of elongated
egg-like shape
and i had these models in there and
i could see through the sort of glassy
material of the elongated egg like shape
to the all the shapes and textures of
the plants
and i don't know why it was so pleasing
but i just
couldn't get rid of that image i just
i printed it in my zines i made a big
poster of it i put on my fridge
um
i i was making a deck of tarot cards
because my partner nicole is really
into tarot
and i was wondering if i should use one
of those for the use that image for the
image for the world card
i also came across images of you know
the world egg which is this egg with
like a snake wrapped around it but just
this idea of like the world edges idea
of like all of life that can kind of be
encapsulated
um and then you know like you think of
like um reproductive cells
or um seeds
or spores
in this way and so this image of
of life encased
and protected
and just so resonant
just stuck around in my head i made that
first image which was which is the first
terrarium image in like 2017 or so
and i don't usually keep images around
for so long but um i just had that one
in my life for a few years and then when
i was um when i was trying to find a way
to make things when you know when the
whole nfd
uh my name is kind of blew up earlier
this year and i was
i was finding that my work i think
images i had made before were kind of
specific to
communities i lived in but not really
resident in this online community that i
was kind of um
finding myself looking for a place in
sort of a new i mean i've been online
making stuff for years but
the amount of the communities that
formed their nfcs are new
and i was looking for a way to share
images that kind of created an identity
for me in the space that i enjoyed but i
also had particular resonance with the
people in this space
and um i just went back to that image
again and i wondered if i could make a
second one
and so i took some other models of
plants in case them again i had the same
feeling of i don't know why it's so
resonant i don't know why i don't know
why so many other people like relate to
it so much but
something about it just
has it's just something about it is
precious and i'm just going to keep
doing them i mean i haven't tried doing
other things i put a new like i started
these like
i minted something new there they like
not a single person bought it like
nobody cared
um but i'm pretty sure next time i'm
making a terrarium
lots of people are gonna care so i've
just found a really resonant thing
um symbol or something
that um people enjoy and i can't get
enough of so i'm gonna keep making those
they're beautiful and they you know
these these pieces are like you know
they really spoke to me in the context
of this show diorama because they're
kind of these like frozen moments in
time that feel
permanent yet ephemeral that are solid
yet uh yet somehow ghostly and they feel
like
they feel like like relics of some kind
of you know future we've yet to see
um and i don't know there's something
just really really special about them
um
yeah nadia mentioned it um
just just that just that like thinking
of seed banks thinking of like you know
we we had this little feeling that we
don't know how long the earth is going
to last and these feel like like bits of
it that might be presumed or something
that there's that um as a facet of uh i
feel like something something of that is
in there as well
um
totally this image that we're looking at
right now this is a this is the original
terrarium 14. um the uh a version of
this sculpture is on view as part of new
art of the new york city show and if you
find it uh it's the portal into the
world that you built with uh that you
built with oria harvey
um i would love to know a little bit you
know we we were talking to oria the
other day um but i'd love to know you
know from your side like what that
collaboration was like and what the two
of you were you know trying to
accomplish together in your in your
installation
um
so first of all i love aurelia's work i
only discovered the reviews work like
this yes like like i and
and she makes so many things that feel
so precious
that
and then the context
she goes to all these like ruins or like
even even museums just kind of feel also
like ruins when they're filled with uh
sculptures from hundreds and thousands
of years ago and she projects her own
um like augmented realities like ar
versions of her
um
of his sculptures in those spaces and
they fit but they feel like they're from
now and it feels like those spaces
existed for thousands of years just for
oria to project ar her aerosculptures
into them
and you know like
i don't know i can't say enough about
like just how much i admire her with so
um to have the opportunity to work with
her on this i just want to be cool about
it like i just wanted to
um not freak out
and do something that we would like
so i met on disclosures had a call one
time and she's so cool like literally
like chill like like like
like
like no spikes in her um like blood
pressure or anything like she's just
like so cool
and we just talked about we talked about
um
i don't remember much of what we talked
about but i remember at one point we
were discussing this idea of like
um like spaces that feel
safe
like feel where you can experience
nature
but um you don't have to worry about
anything
um i also remember i was talking about
she'd show me like
so she got in into the room before i did
and started building and all these um
where you see all of these images of
these like what she calls her um
uh not star children yes he calls him a
star children
so each of these figures these like
humanoid figures in a star shape was not
one of these but was just an actual
five-pointed star
and it wasn't an enclosure like this it
was just like she just taken like a
large image a large transparent image of
like a grid of stars and she just spread
it over a space and like made a sky we
talked about like what to do with the
with the floor with the ground
um i remember subscribing like like like
musing over the fact that like we're
talking about this this ground is this
ending as it is ground it's not grown
we're not it isn't real and we and what
if it made it transparent i wonder if we
don't even have the ground let's get rid
of it
she found a way to get rid of it
completely
um
and so it was a room that you would fly
around in and i had my sculptures kind
of we also got this fog in there and so
the fog would obscure everything and so
i had my sculptures my um models kind of
really far spread out from each other
and the sky that she made was a kind of
path because it's like this infinite
space you come into the room and it's
just there's no floor
you can't see anything because there's
just fog
and there's nothing to guide you
anywhere except for the stars that she
you look up you just see the stars and
so that starts to from the kind of
pathway
and i
i just placed my models along the path
and sometimes off the path so this this
thing that you would find so we made
this kind of game where you kind of like
walk around in this space and use the
stars to find these objects that are
kind of hidden in the space but we just
kept playing with it um and you know i
wanted to upload terrariums in here but
i could not get the glass to render
properly like it would always come out
solid you couldn't see through it and so
i couldn't get my little glass enclosure
and oria masa had some kind of epiphany
or something because one day i went in
there she was like check check out the
room i went in there and she had built
an enclosure i didn't even realize i was
inside of something like i got in there
i thought that that liner looks like the
horizon which is less like one i don't
know
it's just a reflection or something i
thought i was a horizon so i thought i
was in this infinite space as i try like
going towards the horizon i realize wait
no i'm inside an enclosure and then i
get on the outside of it and it's
transparent and i realize oria has built
a terrarium this is what she's got she
got some transparent material in there
you know she's like a wizard with
materials
um
and she and it's this huge object which
i don't know she did either because like
there's like there are some limitations
on this side to be files that you can
upload and like i don't know she did
that
but
she took that room that we had that
infinite space that we had made where
like you're just looking for stuff under
the knights of the stores and she had
made instead this like
world egg
this terrarium that you're inside of
um and she placed my sculptures in there
i didn't even change anything after that
i was just like i just i was just you
know i just enjoyed it so much um so it
was just
this like process in which we just tried
some things and had some conversations
and changed each other's
what we were doing
changed change the things that each
other each other did and she made the
final moves and she just put some
massive strokes on it honestly
no it was so beautiful to see this
collaboration and you know i want to
note that the the space that oria built
in contrast to rodel's uh terrariums she
calls it a stellarium and so i think
that that's a really beautiful you know
uh confluence of both of your both of
your work together
um yeah
yeah and also to experience like
how do we or how can we think
the experience of being in uh or within
nature but within these
virtual
landscapes or these spiritual spaces and
i think that is something that is also
very interesting because
like you said also in your talk we are
in a way um
already kind of uh
i don't know like we already know we
already think we know how we can
experience nature but then once we start
building and creating and developing
these other ways of experiencing nature
within
or through these technological devices
let's say screens and let's say you know
headphones and the you know even sensors
or whatever i think it has
to create a different conversation and
it that this definitely does and i think
it is something that is just absolutely
stunning to be part of and uh and i
think it connects also with different
sense of escape with a different sense
of scale which is something that
i think
can
trigger a series of uh very particular
sensations
um and ways of exploring and moving
through the space i don't know it's a
it's it's the kind of piece that i'd
like to
um either swim across or you know kind
of like fly through it um
and i think it gives that experience uh
even though i'm you know i'm
experiencing this through a device uh
but i think it is something that i don't
know it connects with other
sensibilities and i really really like
how it fills this narrative together
also i know that you know of course
collaborating also is a series of
negotiations but also a series of i know
i guess
thoughts that being put together create
a narrative that known of the parts of
this collaboration necessarily expects
from the beginning and that unexpected
bit of it i think makes it um
very interesting in the end
yeah totally yeah i'm so happy you like
it so if you enjoy it that's what we
were hoping for you know
and just to tack onto what durian was
saying i think as well that you know
what we've been talking also about at
the festival is that it's so we can't
really dissociate the
physical from the virtual the irl from
the url i mean everything is
interdependent and anything that we do
in a virtual space is real and you know
even though you mentioned that these are
just symbols of of plants not actual
plants you know i still think that in a
lot of ways your work points back to the
natural world it points back to this
kind of embodied rootedness in the world
around us um and you know the the being
encapsulated in glass i mean it feels
like a metaphor for
you know a future relic of a plant that
no longer exists because of climate
change or because of you know some other
kind of natural disaster
um
and in so many ways this piece to me is
is is a meta is a metaphor it's a it's
an allegory allegory is probably a
better word um you know from from a
from somewhere else but it also makes me
you know i look at your terraria and i
want to go outside like i i want to go
take a walk and go like touch a tree
when i see them um and i think that's
really powerful because yeah it doesn't
just it's not the kind of piece that
just like entraps you in a virtual world
it like put it almost like reflects you
back and it's like no actually like you
can look at this image but like go out
like you know uh water your water the
water that uh the water that monstera
plant that's on your balcony or you know
whatever it might be um yeah
um you know like um when when i when i
first got in there so so oria is the one
that made that encapsulation right
and when i got in there and as i got in
there and i and i thought what i saw was
a horizon and i thought it was like
infinite space
as i realized it was actually an
enclosure which is the opposite of
infinite space i realized that i was
tricked like there was this illusion
that was created where like i thought i
was in an infinite space but actually
it was an enclosure and the fact of the
enclosure is what created me in the
illusion of the infinite space
and it tripped me out like i like i like
i wrote a long thing and then discord
like in response and i like i was like
am i like
i had a little crisis because
it made me imagine
the real real world and how you know you
look into the distance and you see the
horizon and you you look at the stars
and this and you you think oh it's
infinite or you know whatever but like
origin showed me that like a container
could create the illusion of infinity
and i was just like it it it gave me a
little i was like well what am i in
right now like
you know the the the thing that we're
looking at that seems infinite like is
it really a container i mean not that
it's not that that even matters that
much but the fact of
the possibility of the illusion of a
container describing seeming to describe
infinity really kind of blew my brain so
you're saying that um you know you look
at the you look at material and it makes
you want to go outside and you're making
a connection between
this digital work and how it kind of
makes the
how would how it relates to your
perception of the will and how you want
to interact with the world in life
i had that experience with this with two
um
um you know as a result of aureus input
into it
so yeah you just made me think of that
and just want to tuck that on there
and i i don't know i'd put it the other
way around as well with this quote by um
i think it's alan watts that says
something like
um nothingness is really like the
nothingness of space which contains the
whole universe
that's awesome um rudel we're just out
of time for tonight we've run over
but this is so wonderful to learn more
about this work to learn more about your
practice and your relationships with the
natural world i think that there's a lot
that we can learn about plants you know
we're thinking of welding protocol about
interspecies dependence about the
interconnectedness of all things
and the you know finding knowledge in
non-traditional places looking to the
world looking to ancient histories
looking at indigenous knowledge and what
that can that can show us and so thank
you so much for helping to to exemplify
that um it's really great to have you
yeah thanks so much for inviting me wait
like um when we first talked about doing
this i thought it would be cool but this
was just extra cool like uh android
um thanks and thanks for this
conversation tonight i really enjoyed it
thanks doreen
thank you thank you for the wonderful
talk and the wonderful work as well